feat: add speech synthesis with `experimental_generateSpeech` (#5649)
vercel/ai: content/docs/03-ai-sdk-core/37-speech.mdx

---
title: Speech
description: Learn how to generate speech from text with the AI SDK.
---

# Speech

<Note type="warning">Speech is an experimental feature.</Note>

The AI SDK provides the [`speak`](/docs/reference/ai-sdk-core/speak)
function to generate speech from text using a speech model.

```ts
import { experimental_speak as speak } from 'ai';
import { openai } from '@ai-sdk/openai';
import { readFile } from 'fs/promises';

const audio = await speak({
  model: openai.speech('tts-1'),
  text: 'Hello, world!',
});
```

To access the generated audio:

```ts
const audio = audio.audioData; // audio data e.g. Uint8Array
```

## Settings

### Provider-Specific settings

> Speech models often have provider or model-specific settings which you can set using the `providerOptions` parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can set model-specific settings with the `providerOptions` parameter.
```

```ts highlight="8"
import { openai } from '@ai-sdk/openai';
import { experimental_speak as speak } from 'ai';
import { readFile } from 'fs/promises';

const audio = await speak({
  model: openai.speech('tts-1'),
  text: 'Hello, world!',
  abortSignal: AbortSignal.timeout(1000), // Abort after 1 second
});
```

### Custom Headers

`speak` accepts an optional `headers` parameter of type `Record<string, string>`
that you can use to add custom headers to the speech generation request.

```ts highlight="8"
import { openai } from '@ai-sdk/openai';
import { experimental_speak as speak } from 'ai';
import { readFile } from 'fs/promises';

const audio = await speak({
  model: openai.speech('tts-1'),
  text: 'Hello, world!',
  headers: { 'X-Custom-Header': 'custom-value' },
});
```

### Warnings

Warnings (e.g. unsupported parameters) are available on the `warnings` property.

```ts
import { openai } from '@ai-sdk/openai';
import { experimental_speak as speak } from 'ai';
import { readFile } from 'fs/promises';

const audio = await speak({
  model: openai.speech('tts-1'),
  text: 'Hello, world!',
});

const warnings = audio.warnings;
```

### Error Handling

> When `speak` cannot generate a valid audio, it throws a [`AI_NoAudioGeneratedError`](/docs/reference/ai-sdk-errors/ai-no-audio-generated-error).

Reviewer: We need to generate a page for this
